hi this is pressure Locker the train fly
problem is one of the classical
mathematical puzzles can you solve it
consider two trains that are a hundred
miles apart from each other
the trains move towards each other at a
constant speed of 20 miles per hour
in between the two trains is a fly and
the flies zigzags back and forth between
the two trains at a speed of 40 miles
per hour so the fly starts at one train
goes to the other train and keeps on
going back and forth the following
animation gives you a rough idea of the
path of the fly the puzzle is what is
the total distance that the fly travels
for the purposes of this problem you
want to assume the fly changes speed
instantly and it keeps going back and
forth between the two trains infinitely
many times until the two trains meet so
your problem is to figure out the total
distance that the fly travels there's an
amusing story about this puzzle the
American mathematician John von Neumann
was asked this puzzle at a cocktail
party the story goes that he instantly
gave the answer the person shocked asked
him oh so you know the trick to solve
this puzzle and his answer was what
trick I just solved the infinite series
so give this puzzle a shot you can
either try and solve it by the infinite
series or you can try and figure out
what the trick is when you're ready you
can keep watching the video and I'm
going to present the solution both the
trick and the infinite series all right
let's try and figure out the total
distance that the fly travels you really
don't need to do any complicated math
even though it seems like a difficult
problem so the first observation is that
the two trains move towards each other
at 20 miles an hour we can think about
this that the two trains have a combined
speed of 40 miles per hour 20 plus 20 is
40 the next observation is that it will
take the trains to cover 100 miles at 40
miles per hour it will take them two and
a half hours to cover this distance so
now we've almost solved the puzzle we
figured out that the two trains will
meet in two and a half hours and here's
the final observation if the fly is
moving at 40 miles per hour for two and
a half hours that means it will travel
two and a half hours times 40 miles per
hour which is a hundred miles and that's
it the fly travels a distance of a
hundred miles even though it travels is
very complicated path of going back and
forth so you actually don't need to
model the path you don't need to
calculate any of the distances in
between you just need to calculate the
total time it takes for the two trains
to meet and then multiply that by the
Flies constant speed of 40 miles per
hour so it's a very cool trick and it
can stun people that you can solve the
problem so quickly so now let's solve
the problem the hard way using infinite
series the first thing you have to do is
calculate the distance the fly travels
the first time it meets the train going
the other direction so we'll calculate
this that the train and the fly together
are moving at a speed of 60 miles per
hour because it's 20 miles for the train
and 40 miles for the fly so how long
will it take them to meet what's the
distance the fly will cover well to
cover that hundred miles traveling at 60
miles per hour we know that it will take
a time of 100 divided by 60 we then
multiply that by the 40 miles per hour
that the fly travels at to compute the
fly travels distance of 200 divided by 3
or 66 and 2/3
it's miles another way to think about
this is the fly travels twice as fast as
the Train so they're going to meet at
two-thirds of the way on this hundred
miles which is 66 and 2/3 or 200 over 3
so that's the first distance the fly
travels when he meets the first train
now we need to compute the new distance
when the fly is traveling the other way
to meet the other train so the first
thing we do is we compute that the two
trains are now at a distance of 33 and
1/3 miles we've already calculated that
one train moves 33 and 1/3 miles so that
means the other train also move that
distance and the distance between them
is 33 and 1/3 miles so now we basically
have the same problem except everything
is reduced by 1/3 the distance is 1/3
and so what will be the distance that
the fly covers well we can do the
calculation but it'll actually turn out
intuitively that the fly is going to
cover one-third of the distance it
covered before so this will be 200
divided by 9 and in fact now we'll have
a reduced problem again the distance
between the trains will be reduced by
1/3 and so we can compute an infinite
series where each time we have a factor
of 1/3 when we solve for the total
distance we will get that the fly
travels for a hundred miles of course
this method is a lot more complicated
than using the trick and there's a lot
more room for error along the way so
it's still instructive to go over it but
it's important to know the trick and you
should keep an eye out for it
so that's the train fly problem thanks
for watching this video please subscribe
to my channel I make videos on math and
game theory you can catch me on my blog
mind your decisions which you can follow
on Facebook Google+ and patreon you can
also catch me at pressure Locker on a
bunch of social media places and please
check out my books I've written several
books about math and very cool topics
like the one in this video you can check
out a link
for all my books there is a link in the
video description